---
layout: post
title: Atoms and Elements
tags: lesson nuclear science
date: 2014-01-19 15:00:00 +0000
---

Before we begin to learn about radiation, we must first develop a basic
understanding of chemistry and physics.

<!--more-->

Elements and the structure of the atom
--------------------------------------

All solids, liquids, gases, and plasmas (what scientists call matter,
but you might simply call stuff) are ultimately made from atoms. You can
think of atoms as the tiny building blocks that everything is made from.
There are a limited variety of these blocks that exist (118 as of this
writing), and we call these elements. You are probably already familiar
with many of them (iron, lead, gold, silver, sodium, silicon, carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, etc.), and if you have ever taken chemistry
you may know many more. You may also know of the periodic table of the
elements, which is a convenient chart that arranges the elements
according to their chemical properties.

![](http://www.nist.gov/pml/data/images/PT-2013-Large_2.jpg)

There are two main parts of the atom: the nucleus and the electron
cloud.

### Nucleus

The nucleus forms the center of the atom, and contains nearly all of the
mass of the atom. The nucleus is composed of two types of subatomic
particles: protons and neutrons. Protons and neutrons both have
approximately the same mass (neutrons are slightly more massive), but
protons have a positive electric charge while neutrons have no charge at
all. The protons and neutrons are held together by the strong nuclear
force[^1], which is strong enough to overpower the electrostatic
repulsion (two charges of the same type, like positive and positive or
negative and negative, push each other away) between the protons.

The number of protons in the nucleus is called the atomic number, and it
determines what kind of element the atom is. All atoms of the same
element always have the same number of protons. However, different atoms
of the same element can have a different number of neutrons in their
nucleus. These alternative versions of the element's nucleus are called
isotopes. Different isotopes of the same element have different masses,
but they all behave identically[^2] at the chemical level. However, as
we will see later, the isotopes can have vastly different nuclear
properties, and it is those differences which make much of nuclear
science possible.

Because atoms can have different masses depending on the isotope, it is
important to take note of the isotope's mass (also called atomic mass).
The atomic mass is the sum of the number of protons in the nucleus
(given by the atomic number) and the number of neutrons in the nucleus.
Fortunately, isotopes are usually named according to their atomic mass,
so it is rare that you would actually have to do this sum on your own.

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f0/Nucleus_drawing.svg/200px-Nucleus_drawing.svg.png)

Above is a model of the nucleus depicting the protons and neutrons as
colored spheres tightly packed into a group. It is important to note
that nuclei in reality do NOT look or behave like this (due to quantum
mechanics), but it is a useful mental model nonetheless.

### Electron Cloud

![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/23/Helium_atom_QM.svg)

The electron cloud, as its name suggests, is home to the atom's
electrons. Electrons are very small[^3], nearly massless, negatively
charged particles which surround the nucleus. As shown in the figure
above, the size of the electron cloud is much greater than the size of
the nucleus. When we talk about the sizes of atoms, we are usually
referring to the size of the electron cloud, not the nucleus. Because
the nucleus is so small compared to the electron cloud, the vast
majority (99.9999999999999%) of the volume of an atom is composed of
empty space!

In a neutral atom, the number of electrons is equal to the number of
protons in the nucleus. In this way, each element has a unique
electronic structure, and it is the properties and behavior of the
electrons in atoms that forms the basis of modern chemistry. However, it
is not as important for the purposes of nuclear physics, so I probably
won't mention them very often in future lessons. It is the behavior of
the protons and neutrons in the nucleus that we are interested in, and
this will be the main focus of our brief introduction to nuclear physics
in the lessons ahead.

* * * * *

Summary
-------

-   Matter (stuff) is made of atoms (little building blocks).
-   Atoms are made of two parts: the nucleus (core) which contains the
    positively-charged protons and the neutral neutrons, and the
    electron cloud (shell) where the negatively-charged electrons live.
-   The number of protons in the nucleus determines the atom's element
    (type), and this number is called the atomic number.
-   The number of protons plus the number of neutrons is the atomic mass
    (how "heavy" it is), and this number determines the atom's element
    isotope (version of the element).
-   Isotopes of the same element almost always have the same chemical
    behavior, but generally have very different nuclear behaviors from
    one another.
-   In neutral atoms, the number of electrons is equal to the number of
    protons.
-   The behavior of the electrons controls the chemistry and the
    behavior of the nucleus (the protons and the neutrons) controls the
    nuclear properties. We will focus on the nuclear stuff and leave the
    electrons to the chemists!

Further resources
-----------------

[Crash Course Chemistry: The
Nucleus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FSyAehMdpyI)

[Khan Academy: Introduction to the
atom](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xSQlwWGT8M)

[Chemwiki: The
Atom](http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/Physical_Chemistry/Atomic_Theory/The_Atom)

* * * * *

[^1]: Technically, it's now called the residual nuclear force because we
    now know that it is the leftover force from the [strong
    interaction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strong_interaction)
    between quarks inside the nucleons.

[^2]: There are a few very subtle differences but they can usually only
    be observed under special conditions.

[^3]: Electrons actually don't have
    [*any*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_particle#Point_charge)
    size whatsoever to the best of our knowledge. Kind of weird to think
    about.
