---
layout: post
title: Globalization Challenges for Japanese Companies
tags: opinion japan economics
---

A few months ago, Masamoto Yashiro, CEO of Shinsei Bank, spoke about
[Japanese corporate management styles and the associated globalization
challenges for Japanese
businesses](http://www.fasol.com/2013/10/19/masamoto-yashiro/) at a
workshop at the University of Tokyo. At the time, I wrote a commentary
about his talking points and published it to [my Google+
page](https://plus.google.com/+MitchellAtlas), but as it is visible only
to those in my Japan-related circle, I am republishing a revised version
here.

<!--more-->

English for International Communication
---------------------------------------

From what I've seen at the University of Tokyo, English usage seems to
be reluctantly implemented in the curriculum in my department. Though
all of our courses are taught in English, I have a feeling that the
professors and the Japanese students sometimes resent having to use
English in the classroom. Since I am still a student, I can't speak for
the attitude in the corporate world, but I would guess that many
employees share similar sentiments. It would be interesting to hear the
views of employees at companies which have implemented an official
English-first communication policy, such as at Rakuten and Uniqlo. In
any case, English will likely be the *de facto* world language for the
foreseeable future, so Japanese companies will have no choice but to
improve their overseas managers' English abilities if they are to
succeed in globalization. Of course, it is also possible for companies
to hire English speakers who have developed high Japanese proficiency to
fill positions related to their overseas operations, but in light of how
few non-native Japanese speakers attain native-level competency in
Japanese, there will likely be a shortage of English-Japanese bilingual
workers in the foreseeable future. In the long-term, the number of
proficient English-speakers in Japan must increase in order to produce
workers capable of communicating on the international stage.

Traditional Approaches of Japanese Companies
--------------------------------------------

While there are merits to producing generalists in a company, I think it
is inappropriate to apply that strategy to every career employee. It is
beneficial for high-level managers to have a generalist's understanding
of the departments beneath them, but most of the non-management
employees should strive to become experts in one aspect of the company's
operations. This would allow employees' quality of work to improve over
time as they developed their skills, instead of being re-shuffled every
few years and starting from square one each time. Employees should have
some input into their career trajectory so those who wish to enter
management can be given the opportunity to broaden their experience
within the company, while those who do not can remain where they feel
most competent.

In addition, senior management would do well to be more receptive to
fresh ideas. It is dangerous to mindlessly mirror other companies'
strategies (as exemplified by "What do other banks do?") because it
leads towards a homogenous marketplace. Just as [genetic
diversity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_diversity) allows a
species to effectively respond to changing environment, an industry with
strategic variety will be more adept at competing in the global
marketplace. On that note, Japanese companies should make more of an
effort to recruit foreign talent to take advantage of their different
view points and experiences.

Management structure
--------------------

It almost goes without saying that every company should make efforts to
identify, reward, and encourage high performance from its employees. Of
course, this is often a difficult proposition and I won't go into detail
about specifics, but generally an effective performance evaluation
should present employees with opportunities to distinguish themselves
from their peers through talent and effort and be rewarded accordingly.
This means that pay and promotions should be performance-based, rather
than seniority-based as is the status quo in Japan. However, it is also
important to not engender too much competition within the company, so
that employees do not have motivation to ignore, or even sabotage, their
co-workers in pursuit of promotions or higher pay.

Q&A
---

The last question about University of Tokyo drew my attention since I am
a student here. I don't think that UT should focus too much on its
ranking because they are in [no
position](http://www.u-tokyo.ac.jp/en/about/data/finances.html) to
compete financially with the high endowments of the elite
[American](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_colleges_and_universities_in_the_United_States_by_endowment) and
[British](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_UK_universities_by_endowment)
universities. If it wishes to attract more foreign students and
researchers, I believe that it must increase the quality and rigor of
its classes and it must make it easier for foreign students and
researchers to make their livelihood in Japan (for those who are not
interested in learning the Japanese language). However, I think that the
non-Japanese community at UT will remain small until Japan as a nation
becomes more international-friendly. But that's a topic for a different
time.
