---
layout: post
title: Interesting and educational YouTube channels
tags: fun internet youtube
---

I'm sure that I've mentioned this before, but one of my favorite ways to
spend my free time is to watch videos on YouTube. But there is more to
YouTube than videos of cats and viral videos! In this post, I will tell
you about some of my favorite educational YouTube channels that I
regularly watch.

<!--more-->

[CGP Grey](https://www.youtube.com/user/CGPGrey/videos)
-------------------------------------------------------

I always look forward to watching a CGP Grey video whenever he makes a
new one. CGP Grey is an American living in London, but he makes
painstakingly-detailed videos explaining all sorts of topics. Some of my
favorites include: [The Difference between the United Kingdom, Great
Britain and England
Explained](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rNu8XDBSn10), [Coffee: The
Greatest Addiction
Ever](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OTVE5iPMKLg), [Copyright: Forever
Less One Day](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tk862BbjWx4), and [Death
to Pennies](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5UT04p5f7U), but I haven't
seen any video of his that I haven't liked! Go check him out!

[Vsauce](https://www.youtube.com/user/Vsauce/videos)
----------------------------------------------------

When speaking of American ex-pats in Britain who make YouTube videos,
you can't leave out Michael Stevens of VSauce. VSauce's videos, like CGP
Grey's, are also on topics of general interest, but VSauce stands out
due to Michael's easy to follow presentation style and his impressive
ability to smoothly guide the viewer across many related topics under
each video's main theme. Some of my favorites include: [Are We Ready For
Aliens?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCBlAAtJA54), [What Does Earth
Look Like?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lR7s1Y6Zig), [Is The
5-Second Rule True?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYXdsOEWBj0), and
[You Don't Type Alone](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPXxhgdtcXs). If
there's something that you have ever wondered about, chances are that
VSauce has done a video about it!

[CrashCourse](https://www.youtube.com/user/crashcourse/videos)
--------------------------------------------------------------

CrashCourse is an ongoing series created by John and Hank Green (better
known as the [VlogBrothers](https://www.youtube.com/user/vlogbrothers))
in which they do weekly in-depth lessons about the sciences and
humanities. John Green, as an award-winnning author, handles the
humanities lessons, while his younger brother Hank, a musician and
entrepreneur (but trained as a biochemist), takes care of the sciences.
So far, they have produced full series on [World
History](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLBDA2E52FB1EF80C9), [Literature](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8dPuuaLjXtOeEc9ME62zTfqc0h6Pe8vb), [US
History](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8dPuuaLjXtMwmepBjTSG593eG7ObzO7s), [Biology](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL3EED4C1D684D3ADF), [Ecology](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8dPuuaLjXtNdTKZkV_GiIYXpV9w4WxbX),
and [Chemistry](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8dPuuaLjXtPHzzYuWy6fYEaX9mQQ8oGr),
and will be continuing this year with Psychology and an
as-yet-unannounced humanities topic. If you ever wanted to re-learn all
those classes you ignored in high school, well here is your chance!

[MinutePhysics](https://www.youtube.com/user/minutephysics/videos)
------------------------------------------------------------------

MinutePhysics's creator Henry Reich aims to explain the physics of the
everyday world using short, simple, hand-drawn animations. I like
Henry's videos because of his imaginative drawings and concise, yet
thorough presentation style. He also has another channel
called [MinuteEarth](https://www.youtube.com/user/minuteearth/videos) which
focuses on biology, geology, and ecology.

The Brady Haran Channels
------------------------

Brady Haran is an Australian filmmaker who used to work for the BBC, but
now dedicates his time to making YouTube videos. And he is prolific!
Many of Brady's channels are collaborations with the faculty of the
University of Nottingham about a variety of topics: [Periodic
Videos](https://www.youtube.com/user/periodicvideos/videos) covers
chemistry, [Numberphile](https://www.youtube.com/user/numberphile/videos) covers
mathematics, [Sixty
Symbols](https://www.youtube.com/user/sixtysymbols/videos) does
physics, [Computerphile](https://www.youtube.com/user/Computerphile/videos) does
computer science, [Deep Sky
Videos](https://www.youtube.com/DeepSky/videos) does astronomy, Words of
the World
does [linguistics](https://www.youtube.com/user/wordsoftheworld/videos),
and [more](http://periodicvideos.blogspot.co.uk/2012/06/here-are-my-channels.html)!
Between all the videos he makes, you will never be lacking something
interesting to watch!

[Smarter Every Day](https://www.youtube.com/user/destinws2/videos)
------------------------------------------------------------------

Smarter Every Day is run by Destin, an engineer living in Alabama. Most
of his videos take a different look at the world around us, using [slow
motion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJ9lNRAjTQM),
amazing [demonstrations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVEo_mckBIc),
or even [silliness with
chickens](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_dPlkFPowCc)! Destin's
easy-going attitude together with his talent for analysis make his
channel a must-watch.

[Veritasium](https://www.youtube.com/user/1veritasium/videos)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Last, but definitely not least, is Veritasium, run by Derek Muller.
Derek makes science-themed videos, interviews, and experiments to help
clear up many common misconceptions about science. One of my favorite
videos is the [dropped slinky
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wGIZKETKKdw), where he
demonstrates the unusal way in which an uncoiled slinky falls to the
ground. Or the [World's Roundest
Object](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZMByI4s-D-Y) where Derek takes
the viewer through a history of the kilogram and investigates what is
being done to improve it. Give his channel a look!

Wrap-up
-------

As you can see, I enjoy watching YouTube videos that make you think
about the world in a new way. I am always on the lookout for new,
interesting channels to watch, so if you have recommendations of your
own, feel free to share them in the comments!
