---
layout: post
title: "Advanced RSS&#58; a review of RSSOwl"
tags: lesson fun internet rss review
---

[Last time]({% post_url 2014-01-15-basic-rss-using-feedly-to-save-time-online %}) I
introduced RSS as a way to keep up with all of your favorite websites
without having to visit them one by one. I recommended a popular online
RSS reader called [Feedly](http://feedly.com/index.html#welcome) to
start off. Feedly has many basic features such as feed categorization,
mobile access, and easy sharing to social networks.

But what if you want other features like offline access, advanced
grouping, labeling, filtering, searching, and more? Then you will
probably be best served by a more powerful RSS reader. Enter
[RSSOwl](http://www.rssowl.org/)

<!--more-->

Everything but the kitchen sink
-------------------------------

![](http://www.rssowl.org/images/contribute/getrssowl_large)](http://www.rssowl.org/download)

One of my readers ([@wataruen](https://twitter.com/wataruen)) introduced
me to RSSOwl. RSSOwl is a free, desktop-based RSS reader available for
Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux. The easiest way to describe RSSOwl is a
mail client for your RSS feeds; it comes with all the filtering,
sorting, and categorizing tools that you would normally use for your
email, allowing you to carefully control your reading experience on an
individual feed level. You also get other features like notifications,
lots of keyboard shortcut keys, secure site support, and advanced
sharing as well.

Setup and first use
-------------------

You can download RSSOwl from their [homepage](www.rssowl.org/download)

After installing the software and running for the first time, you are
prompted to add feeds to your reading list. Since I already had a
collection in Feedly, I used Feedly to download my feeds as an OPML file
and then imported them into RSSOwl.

![rssowl opml
import]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/images/rssowl-opml-import.png)

After importing your feeds, you are presented with the program's main
interface.

![]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/images/main-screen.png)

You can change the layout of the interface to match your personal taste.
I prefer the "widescreen" layout which shows the list of feeds displayed
in the left column, the unread items of the selected feed in the middle
column, and the current item in the right column. After reading each
article, you can move on to the next one by clicking it in the middle
column, or by using keyboard shortcuts to jump between items (CTRL+left
arrow and CTRL+right arrow by default). You can also apply labels for
categorization, mark a post as sticky (gives the title a yellow color
for easy retrieval), archive (save to your computer for later reading),
or share to social various networks and services.

Advanced features
-----------------

One of the major differences between RSSOwl and Feedly is that RSSOwl
allows you to create filters for your feeds, which allows you to
automatically search and sort through your content in whatever way you
choose. For example, here is a filter that I created which will look for
posts written within the last week that haven't been read yet, which
also contain "typhoon" in their title and "weather" anywhere in the
item. It will then automatically label the news as "Important" and make
a copy of the article in the folder (RSSOwl calls them "bins") called
"typhoon alert!". In this way, you can pick out relevant posts matching
any criteria that you want and perform actions on them.

![filtersettings]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/images/filtersettings.png)

Another unique feature of RSSOwl is the ability to create saved searches
as a feed. This allows you to search a site (such as YouTube or Google
News) for a keyword and have new results matching that query delivered
to you as a feed. This could come in handy if you are monitoring news on
a specific topic instead of a regular source.

![keyword
feeds]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/images/keyword-feeds.png)

Finally, if you dig into the settings panel, you will see many of the
other features that RSSOwl supports, like customized keyboard shortcuts,
d-protected sites, add-ons for additional functionality, and a
news update notifier.

In conclusion
-------------

Compared to Feedly, RSSOwl pulls out all the stops with a very full
feature set. Personally, I will be sticking to Feedly because I don't
really need all of the advanced sorting and filtering functionality that
RSSOwl provides, but if you need to monitor hundreds or thousands of
feeds and need a way to make sense of that firehose of information,
RSSOwl will haveÂ you covered.
