---
layout: post
title: "A Brief History of Radiation, Part 1"
tags: history lesson nuclear science
---

Though radiation and nuclear technology may seem like a hallmark of the
modern era, we have known about radiation for quite some time. Let's
take a look at the history and the people behind this amazing branch of
physics.

<!--more-->

{:toc}

The Discovery of X-rays
-----------------------

The discovery of radiation goes all the way back to 1895, when German
scientist Wilhelm Röntgen first[^1] discovered X-rays.

![Wilhelm
Röntgen](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/71/Roentgen2.jpg/220px-Roentgen2.jpg "Also pictured: Röntgen's beard.")

In 1895, Röntgen was experimenting with Crookes tubes, a predecessor to
the more modern cathode-ray tube). A Crookes tube is, essentially, a
sealed glass tube filled with low-presure gas with metal electrodes at
either end. When a high voltage is applied between the electrodes, a
stream of negatively-charged particles called a cathode ray (what we now
know to be electrons) is ejected from the negatively-charged cathode to
the positively-charged anode. As the electrons travel through the tube,
they collide with the gaseous atoms, transferring some of their energy
to the electrons in the gas atoms, causing them to excite and de-excite
(fluorescence), releasing visible light. Depending on the geometry of
the tube, some of the higher-energy electrons miss the anode and instead
collide with the back wall of the tube, causing it too to fluoresce and
produce a visible glow.

![Schematic of a Crookes
tube](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ad/Crookes_tube2_diagram.svg/250px-Crookes_tube2_diagram.svg.png "Schematic of a Crookes tube")

Röntgen was running an experiment with a Crookes tube that he had
covered up with cardboard, when he noticed that a fluorescent cardboard
screen nearby lit up when the tube was on. This was puzzling because the
cardboard covering should have prevented light or the cathode rays from
escaping, yet something else was passing through it! No matter where he
moved the screen in his laboratory, the same effect occurred, even with
objects placed between the tube and the screen! Eventually, he tried
placing his own hand in front of the screen, and saw an image of the
bones in his hand projected onto the screen. He spent weeks
investigating these new rays, which he named X-rays (where "X" meant
"unknown"), discovering that objects varied in their transparency to
X-rays, that these rays could not be reflected or refracted (bent), that
they were not deflected by a magnetic field, that photographic plates
could be exposed by X-rays, and that the source for the rays was the
spot where the cathode ray collided with the glass wall of the Crookes
tube. He made the first-ever X-ray radiograph of his wife's hand, thus
demonstrating its potential use as a medical diagnostic tool. Röntgen
would later receive the first Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901 for his
work with X-rays. Element 111, roentgenium would later be named in his
honor in 2004. His name is also borrowed for the unit of equivalent
dose, rem, mostly used in the United States.

The discovery of radioactivity
------------------------------

![Henri
Becquerel](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Portrait_of_Antoine-Henri_Becquerel.jpg/499px-Portrait_of_Antoine-Henri_Becquerel.jpg "Henri Becquerel")

After Röntgen published his findings on X-rays, a French scientist named
Henri Becquerel began searching for other materials that might emit
X-rays. He initially thought that it was the phosphorescent and
fluorescent substances that were emitting the X-rays as they fluoresced,
so he began to experiment with various fluorescent materials to try to
detect any X-rays that they would give off. He was unsuccessful at
first, until he came across uranyl potassium sulfate.

To test these materials for X-ray emission, he covered a photographic
plate (which was known to be sensitive to X-rays) in black paper,
sprinkled a powder of the substance on top of the paper, and placed the
arrangement in the sunlight for a few hours. When he developed the
photographic plate after testing the uranyl potassium sulfate, Becquerel
saw that the area of the plate below the uranyl salt had been exposed.
He wanted to repeat this experiment, but because Paris was cloudy that
day, he put the plate and the uranyl salt in a drawer and waited for a
sunny day. He decided to develop the plate anyway, and was surprised to
that the silhouette on the plate beneath where the salt sat was stronger
than ever! From this, he concluded that X-rays were coming from the
uranium itself, even without prior exposure to sunlight! This marked the
discovery of spontaneous radioactivity, later shortened to
radioactivity.

![Exposed Becquerel
plate](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1e/Becquerel_plate.jpg "One of Becquerel's plates showing exposure from uranyl salt.")

For his work in discovering radioactivity, Becquerel would share the
1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with Pierre and Marie Curie. The SI unit for
radioactivity, the becquerel, is named after him.

Curious Curies
--------------

![Pierre and Marie
Curie](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Pierre_and_Marie_Curie.jpg/640px-Pierre_and_Marie_Curie.jpg "Pierre and Marie Curie in their laboratory")

Marie Curie (née Skłodowska) was born in Warsaw, Poland in 1867 as the
youngest of five children to Władysław and Bronisława Skłodowski, both
teachers. At the time, Poland was divided between the kingdoms of
Russia, Prussia, and Austria, yet there were periodic (ultimately
unsucessful) uprisings for Polish independence. Marie's parents lost
money and property due to their support of the uprisings, which made for
a difficult upbringing for Marie and her siblings. She would lose both
her oldest sister, Zofia, to typhus when Marie was 7, and her mother
Bronisława to tuberculosis when Marie was 10. Though her mother was a
devout Catholic, her death and the death of Marie's sister caused Marie
to give up Catholicism and become an agnostic.

Despite these hardships, Marie graduated from a girls' gymnasium in 1883
with high marks at age 15. However, she and her sister Bronisława were
denied enrollment into the Russian-run universities because they were
women; instead they undertook studies at the Flying University, a
clandestine educational program which defied the ideology of the Russian
authorities. Fortunately for Marie and Bronisława, The Flying University
also accepted women into their ranks.

During this time, Marie and Bronisława made a pact: Marie would help pay
for Bronisława's tuition at medical school in Paris, and Bronisława
would do the same for Marie two years later. While Bronisława went to
Paris to begin her studies, Marie took time off from her studies to work
as a governess in Warsaw, and then later in Szczuki. She eventually fell
in love with the son of one of her employers, Kazimierz Żorawski (who
would later go on to become a famous mathematician in his own right),
but his parents did not approve of their relationship due to her
comparative poverty. Heartbroken, Marie returned to Warsaw in 1889,
where she continued to work as a governess while also continuing her
studies.

In 1891, Marie finally saved up enough money to join her sister in
Paris, where she enrolled in the University of Paris, studying physics.
Still destitute, she studied during the day and tutored in the evenings,
enduring cold winters and sometimes passing out from hunger. She earned
a physics degree in 1893, followed by a mathematics degree in 1894. In
the same year, she also met Pierre Curie, at the time a science lecturer
at the École supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la
ville de Paris (ESPCI). Intending to return to Poland after completing
her studies, she turned down Pierre's first marriage proposal. After she
was denied an academic position at Kraków University in 1894 because she
was a woman, Pierre wrote to her during this time and convinced her to
return to Paris to pursue a PhD. After Pierre received his doctorate,
they were married in 1895.

After Becquerel's discovery of spontaneous radiation in 1896, Marie
decided to study uranium rays as the topic of her PhD thesis. Some years
prior, Pierre and his brother Jaques had invented an electrometer, a
device for measuring electric charge. Marie used Pierre's electrometer
to discover that the uranium rays caused air around a sample to become
ionized. From this, she was able to deduce that the radioactivity (a
word she coined to describe this phenomenon) of a uranium compound
depended only on the amount of uranium present in the sample. This
implied that the radiation was coming from the uranium atoms themselves,
which meant that atoms were not indivisible, as had been previously
thought. She also noticed that two types of uranium ore, pitchblende and
chalcolite, were more radioactive compared to pure uranium, implying
that there must be another kind of radioactive substance in the minerals
that was producing the radioactivity. She then began looking for other
substances which were radioactive, discovering that thorium (an element
discovered in 1828) was also radioactive. Pierre, who at the time had
been studying crystals, grew increasingly interested in Marie's work and
soon abandoned his research to join her.

Marie and Pierre set out to search for the cause of pitchblende's
excessive radioactivity. They optimistically began with only 100 grams
of pitchblende, but over the course of their research, they would
literally go through tons of pitchblende in the course of their research
looking for new elements. In 1898, they announced their discovery of two
new elements, which they named Polonium (in honor of Marie's homeland)
and Radium (from the Latin *radius*, meaning "ray"). In 1902, they
managed to extract 100mg of radium chloride salt from one ton of
pitchblende. However, the Curies desired to isolate polonium and radium
in their pure forms to conclusively prove the existence of their new
elements. Marie was not able to isolate pure radium until 1910, but she
never succeeded in isolating polonium.

In 1900, Marie became the first woman faculty member of the École
Normale Supérieure, and Pierre joined the faculty at the University of
Paris. She was finally awarded her doctorate degree from the University
of Paris in June 1903, becoming the first woman in Europe to earn a PhD
in the sciences. Later that year, Marie, together with her husband
Pierre and Henri Becquerel, shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics. In
doing so, she became the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in any field,
and (most likely) the only person to win a Nobel Prize and defend a PhD
thesis in the same calendar year.

![Pierre and Marie Curie,
1903](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Pierre_Curie_%281859-1906%29_and_Marie_Sklodowska_Curie_%281867-1934%29%2C_c._1903_%284405627519%29.jpg/425px-Pierre_Curie_%281859-1906%29_and_Marie_Sklodowska_Curie_%281867-1934%29%2C_c._1903_%284405627519%29.jpg "Pierre and Marie Curie, 1903")

Tragedy struck the Curies in 1906, when Pierre was killed when he was
run over by a horse-drawn cart in heavy rain. Though she was devastated
by Pierre's sudden death, she resolved to continue her work, taking over
Pierre's chair at the University of Paris, in honor of his memory. Thus,
Marie Curie became the first female faculty member of the University of
Paris. She later established the Radium Institute (now known as the
Curie Institute) there, a laboratory dedicated to the study of
radioactivity and its applications in chemistry, physics, and medicine.

In 1910, Marie finally succeeded in isolating radium, and used it to
create a unit of radioactivity, the curie, defined as the activity of 1
gram of Radium-226, equivalent to [latex]3.7\times 10\^{10} ,
\mathrm{Bq}[/latex]. In 1911, she received a second Nobel Prize, this
time for Chemistry, in "in recognition of her services to the
advancement of chemistry by the discovery of the elements radium and
polonium, by the isolation of radium and the study of the nature and
compounds of this remarkable element." She was the first person to win
two Nobel Prizes, and remains the only person to win two Nobel Prizes in
two different scientific categories.[^2]

![The Curies experimenting with
radium](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b9/Curie_and_radium_by_Castaigne.jpg "The Curies experimenting with radium")

During World War I, Marie was very active in the French war effort. She
offerred to donate the gold in her various medals and awards (including
her two Nobel Prizes) to the war effort, but the French National Bank
refused to accept them. Instead, she used most of her Nobel Prize
winnings to buy war bonds. She entreated the government to allow her to
create France's first military radiology centers. As the first Director
of the Red Cross Radiology Service, she begged manufacturers, car body
shops, and wealthy acquaintances to donate money, cars, and equipment
for her project. She designed and built 20 mobile radiography units and
200 ordinary radiography units at field hospitals to treat wounded
soldiers. Intending to operate the X-ray machines herself, she learned
driving, anatomy, radiology, and auto mechanics, and together with her
daughter Irène (who was only 17 at the time) she went to the battle
front in 1914 to treat the wounded. As the radiography equipment was
very primitive, Marie and Irène were exposed to unsafe levels of X-ray
radiation as they examined their patients. At the Radium Institute,
Marie and Irène trained about 150 women as radiological assistants by
1916, and would later train visiting American soldiers stationed in
Paris in 1919. Over the course of the war, over one million soldiers
were treated with her X-ray units, saving countless lives. Marie also
developed hollow radon-containing (a radioactive gas given off by the
decay of radium) needles which could be implanted in wounded areas to
kill infected tissue (remember, this was before the advent of
antibiotics). She produced the radon using her personal one-gram supply
of radium (at the time, it comprised the entire French radium stock).
After the end of the war, Marie wrote about her experiences in her book,
*Radiology in War*. Despite all her efforts, Marie would not receive any
official recognition of her military service from the French government,
though she later turned down a Legion of Honour award in 1921 as her
international fame and reputation grew.

![Curie in one of her mobile X-ray
vehicles](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3d/Marie_Curie_-_Mobile_X-Ray-Unit.jpg "Curie in one of her mobile X-ray vehicles")

Marie Curie spent most of her postwar career raising money for her
Radium Institute, travelling to the United States in 1921 where she was
welcomed by President Harding and presented with the first gram of
radium isolated in the US. She also toured and lectured in other
countries to raise money and awareness of her Institute and the
important applications of radiation. Thanks to her campaign, the Radium
Institute became one of the preeminent radiation research laboratories
worldwide. She wrote a biography of her late husband Pierre in 1923, and
visited Poland again in 1925 to oversee the groundbreaking for the
Radium Institute in Warsaw, which opened in 1932 with Bronisława Curie
as its director.

In addition to all of their professional accomplishments, Marie and
Pierre raised two daughters: Irène, born in 1897, and Ève, born in 1904.
Though her children were French, Marie hired Polish governesses so that
her children would learn her native language. After Pierre's death,
Marie never remarried[^3], continuing to raise her children alone. Irène
would follow in her mother's footsteps, becoming a scientist and winning
a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935 together with her husband Frédéric
Joliot-Curie, for their discovery of artificial radioactivity. Ève took
a different path, becoming an accomplished musician and writer, later
publishing a biography of Marie in 1937. Though she herself is the only
member of the Curie family to not win a Nobel Prize, her husband Henry
Richardson Labouisse, Jr. collected a Nobel Peace Prize in 1965 on
behalf of UNICEF, of which he was the director. In all, the Curie family
has received more Nobel Prizes (5) than any other.

Towards the end of her career, Marie Curie was afflicted with several
health conditions, including double cataracts, which nearly left her
blind. She eventually succombed to aplastic anemia in 1934, at the age
of 66. It is almost certain that her ailments were caused by exposure to
ionizing radiation, whose harmful health effects were not well-known at
the time. To this day, many of Marie's possessions, including her notes
and cookbooks, are highly radioactive and must be stored in lead-lined
boxes and handled with protective clothing. Marie was buried together
with Pierre in 1934, but their remains were re-interred in the Panthéon
in Paris in 1995 to honor their achievements. Marie Curie is the first
and only woman to date interred at the Panthéon on her own merits.

Although she became quite famous, she remained a very modest and
generous person throughout her life. She intentionally did not patent
the radium-isolation process so that others could benefit from it
freely. She and Pierre also refused many awards and gifts, insisting
that they be given to her affiliated scientific institutions instead.
Albert Einstein once remarked, "Marie Curie is of all celebrated beings,
the one whom fame has not corrupted."

The Curies' work with radioactivity changed the foundations of atomic
physics. The high radioactivity of radium proved to be an invaluable
source of high-energy particles used for later experimental work on the
study of atoms. Radium was also used to develop radiotherapy as one of
the first effective cancer treatments. Marie Curie also saved countless
lives during World War I with her mobile radiography units on the
battlefield. She also showed the world that a woman could accomplish
just as much, if not more, than a man, in spite of the sexist barriers
that existed at the time. She is remembered today as the most well-known
(by far) woman scientist of all time, by element 96 (Curium) and the
unit of radioactivity (curie) named in her honor, the two Radium
Institutes (since renamed Curie Institutes) that she founded, and her
family legacy in many branches of science.

Further Resources
-----------------

[In-depth biography of Marie
Curie](http://www.aip.org/history/curie/contents.htm)

[BBC documentary on Marie Curie's
life](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zz7Q-zZ4onc"\>BBC documentary on
Marie Curie's life)

[^1]: There is some debate as to whether Röntgen was really the first
    person to observe the effects of X-rays, but he was almost certainly
    the first person to study their effects in detail.

[^2]: Linus Pauling won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Peace, John
    Bardeen won the Nobel Prize in Physics twice, and Frederick Sanger
    is a double-winner of the Chemistry Prize.

[^3]: She did, however, have a brief affair in 1910 with Paul Langevin,
    another French physicist. Funnily enough, their grandchildren,
    Hélène Langevin-Joliot and Michel Langevin, would later marry.
